## Preface

Pansharpening has improved only slightly in the past two decades, while related and more complex tasks in image processing have made long strides. Handmade pansharpening algorithms have been stuck at local maxima. Learned models, even the most elaborate, have not convincingly shown they are worth their computation. The more technical parts of this project suggest proximate causes of the problem: for example, that we are overlooking color conversion methods. But this essay, or rumination, takes higher-level views. It is a tour of some references I had in mind while working on this project, all connected to pansharpening but in different ways. Overall, it makes argument that the _task_ of pansharpening should be understood from a critical distance, but that the _output_ of pansharpening should feel immediate.


## How big are pictures?

The linguist David Zubin [proposed a typology](https://escholarship.org/content/qt44q4w68s/qt44q4w68s_noSplash_1c9886bb9a4650047662d293c0f8d8aa.pdf?t=nsvvtu) of the object scales we deal with in everyday life – as subjectively understood, not as measured – that reaches something hard to define, the kind of thing we recognize in dreams. Lightly adapted, his categories are:

- Type A. Objects smaller than us, which we can handle to see (or otherwise sense) from different angles. A ladle, a pebble, a phone, a beetle, our own hands: small things. Things we can envelop with our awareness.

- Type B. Objects which we cannot freely move, but can move ourselves to take in from different perspectives. An elephant, the outside of a house, a fence, a mountain: big things. Things we can lightly hold with our awareness.

- Type C. Objects understood as we look across them, or move through them in limited ways, to piece together a compound perspective. A mural, a lake, a room walked through but not explored, the view from an overlook: scenes. Things that lightly hold our awareness.

- Type D. Objects we move within, or know in other ways, but cannot sense as a whole (although we may see parts as their own objects). A forest, a town, an interstate highway, the inside of our home, the shoreline of a river: landscapes. These are things that envelop our awareness. They may feel practically infinite in detail. The notes on Zubin’s talk say _there is no perspective_. We could also say there are too many perspectives to count.

This is a typology of experiences of objects, not of objects themselves. A map of kinds of maps, so to speak. Things in the world move between Zubin’s types as easily as we imagine them doing so. They are saying something about how it feels to see and know physical things. When I read his framework, I think of Lick Observatory.

James Lick was an eccentric piano-maker who bought large properties around San Francisco that the gold rush made extremely valuable. In old age, he thought to memorialize himself with a pharaonic, marble-faced pyramid at 4th and Market. The geographer George Davidson persuaded Lick that a more durable legacy would be a world-class observatory. Davidson happened to need one. Lick Observatory, commissioned 1888, is less directly imposing than a downtown pyramid would have been: it’s only a spray of white dots on the horizon hills, doing the looking itself. Or that’s what it was to me.

But the summer before last, my wife and an old friend and I took a day trip to see it. We went east from San José on avenues, then veering roads through oak savanna and occasional farms, then laborious switchbacks. There is a faint smell of cows, and the dots turn into eggshell domes. Around the domes, on the summit, is parking, a gift shop, and the usual signs and traces of grad students. You can see way out over the Pacific and back to the Sierra far inland, and the sky seems to take up more than half the sphere of vision. In one white dome, in a varnished wooden hanger as if it were a Zeppelin, is a beautiful machine that contains the largest precision lens still in regular, general-purpose use.

You can take this thing, the Great Lick Refractor, as the rubricated incipit of Big Science. If the Manhattan Project, CERN, the Hubble Space Telescope, LIGO, the Mars rovers, and the Human Genome Project – managerially complex, capital-intensive projects of public discovery – are a background part of the life we know, their mold was molded here. You can’t touch the telescope (you can; you don’t) but you can take a lap around the dome and see it the way you see a monument. It becomes a type B object within a type C object. In the nearby hallways are old eyepieces and photographic plates that make it imaginable to learn to use the observing system’s parts and tools as type A objects.

The telescope sits in the observatory, and the observatory sits in a project to turn the night sky – a mystery of type D – into a catalog of intelligible type C landscapes. At this observatory, the astronomer E.E. Barnard was the last person to discover a large celestial object just by looking: he found Amalthea, a reddish moon of Jupiter, entirely without photography. <!-- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JaR9DwmKL18 --> He was also the first to discover a comet, 206P/Barnard–Boattini, without looking at all: by photography alone.

That partial disembodiment of astronomy, from a science of looking at the sky to a science of looking at photographs, archives, and statistics, is one of the things that the observatory in its function as a historical site is here to commemorate. This kind of thing was happening to many kinds of seeing around then. How odd it must have been to read news about spiral nebulae too dim to see, Röntgen’s mysterious rays, and Muybridge’s floating horses.

When I see the white flecks on the horizon now, they are still virtual point sources, in the far field, but also I remember craning my head around a vault. I know the observatory two ways. There is something pleasantly uncanny about this double scale, the way there is about a realistic dollhouse. The feeling is not rare if you go looking for it. It’s even around the postcards of Teotihuacán and the Grand Canyon on the fridge: small but big! Every lens is a machine for rescaling; a telescope is only an extreme one. And the Earth-observing satellites we’re interested in with pansharpening are, from an optical engineering point of view, reasonably ordinary large telescopes. Their mirrors are just about the same size as their ancestor and optical equivalent, the Great Lick Refractor lens. And they are also involved in a project of representing something functionally infinite as a vast but enumerable collection of parts.

The images that Potato is concerned with shimmer and slip under consideration between types A, B, C, and D. They are computationally tractable matrices of manipulable, knowable pixels. They are also immersive photographs of places in so much detail that they allow unbounded exploration and interpretation. Transformation in scale and category is a necessary part of representation, but these images are an unusually efficient way to get size-of-things decompression sickness. One of the reasons they unsettle and upset people is that they carry so much of this scale shock.

It is not their supposedly godlike perspective that makes them important to me. It’s their way of reflecting the world and, following from that, their wild resistance to classification.


## Prospects

The geographer Jay Appleton suggested that we esthetically prefer places in landscapes that balance _prospect_, the opportunity to see, against _refuge_, the opportunity to be unseen. A comfortable place for humans could be a grove of trees with good sight-lines onto open but interesting surroundings. Maybe some of the appeal of satellite images can be understood in these terms. They have extraordinarily wide prospects – hundreds of km² – and the ultimate refuge – never to have been present at the point of view.

But this unoccupied perspective has an eeriness. When Donna Haraway wanted to illustrate the idea of a pseudo-omniscient but actually ungrounded way of seeing in _Situated Knowledges_, an essay on perspective in science, she used this orbital viewpoint as her metaphor. This stings a bit, for me and for fellow practitioners I’ve discussed it with over the years, because there is truth in it. But Haraway was diagnosing, not imprecating.

A simple prescription is to think about the literal details of satellite imagery. “The view from nowhere doesn’t emerge from nowhere”, wrote the artist and historian Ingrid Burrington. I am trying to contribute here in small, technical ways. I don’t imagine that talking about how sensor arrays are laid out can get at the nexus of the problem, but it might loosen some of its outer loops. Interested people might want a sense of the human-made and -operated physical object that is in fact at the point that we rhetorically call empty. The photographic astronomy that seemed so mechanical at first, in E.E. Barnard’s day, was using hand-made, hand-exposed, hand-developed, eye-seen, mind-interpreted, communally theorized [plates](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=noZk9lCAhEo#t=7m31s), and present satellite images are likewise thoroughly human productions even when people worry or brag that they are not.

Another way of thinking about the question of who’s doing the looking in satellite imagery is the para-empiricism of Laura Kurgan. In _Close Up at a Distance_, she writes:

> Data are always collected for a specific purpose, by a combination of people, technology, money, commerce, and government. The phrase “data visualization”, in that sense, is a bit redundant: data are already a visualization.

> My claim is not that this plunges us into some abyss of uncertainty, though, or makes it impossible to function in the real world. On the contrary, it is only on the condition of accepting this condition of data, in _para_-empirical condition, that we have any chance of operating responsibly in or on the world.

All of us who work in data, I think, pause sometimes to reflect that we are downstream of others who make what we think of as the raw data, and at the same time upstream of others who think of what we make as the raw data. We’re all in the anabranches and braid-bars of these flows. We do better when we have a sense of where we are. I am not in the same place as Kurgan or as anyone else. I only hope to clean up some details like how we handle color. But to seriously pursue even this kind of minor issue leads us, as Kurgan writes, to “admit that our data are not the same as reality”. Kurgan’s work, and Burrington’s, and Haraway’s, does not directly make me better at making representations. It leads me to become a better interpreter of representations.

Sometimes I’ve been asked, when these ideas have come up at business-expensed dinners and in conference hallways, whether satellite image mosaics are maps or photos. It’s a good question but I don’t have a good answer. A map I guess is a kind of diagram, a generalization, a mixture of a drawing and a story, an interpretation from the space of a Type D planet to the space of a Type A or B page or app. Image mosaics might be that. Photographs, on the other hand, are faithful records of visible light at a moment. Perhaps. This has always been a bit of a polite fiction. Film photos are abstruse chemical reactions many steps removed from the light, traditionally retouched, and with much more complicated relationships to time than usually admitted. So image mosaics are – what? Diagrams made of photos? Maps made under the constraint of only using sampled light? 

I don’t know. Maybe the question we’re really asking is something like: Where’s the perspective in a satellite mosaic? Is it in each image or in their particular combination? But I don’t think that’s neatly answerable either.

I know that I default my maps to imagery. I am convinced by the visualization expert Robert Simmon’s arguments that, all else being equal, we understand a landscape best when we see it in the ordinary way. Simmon will use false color or an abstract diagram where it’s the best way to show something, but in most of his data visualizations he’s working with plain old true color – the thing that our brains and eyes have been co-adapting to understand for a million generations. His work has a way of looking obvious, as highly refined representational artifacts often do. (Sometimes when I look at [his images](https://robertsimmon.com/landscapes) I’m reminded of the poet Mary Oliver, who seemed find every feeling and concept imaginable within easy reach of plain language.)

Starting with true-color images, something roughly like _ordinary sight_, has served me well as a maker and as a user of maps. If I want to see Sagrada Família without going to Barcelona, I’m looking for a photo before I’m looking for a blueprint. I use street maps when I need to, but I don’t want to walk around, to know the world, with every shape polygonized and every real color treated as a distraction and painted over: to have a car’s-eye view of Earth. I rarely need to see my planet in wireframe.

One of the classic disputes in the practical and philosophical arguments about geospatial software is between an object view and a field view. For the object thinkers, what is known are points, polygons, and other sharp geometry: _vector data_. Think of property lines. For any given property, any given point can be determined to be inside it or outside it. This is the interpretation that has mostly won. It certainly has its merits. Its positive geospatial objects are a good fit for the kinds of database architectures and legal frameworks that also prevail. When this is taught in schools it often comes with the slogan “raster is faster but vector is correcter” – meaning that the truth is polygonal, and we only only convert it to grids, like images, as a convenience for computation and display.

In the worldview of fields, on the other hand, everything is continuous. Things can be measured or sampled at points, even fine grids of them, and summed within imagined shapes, but real quantities are never seen going from A to A′ without passing through something between. I feel more at home here. My usual material is pixels, and “my nature is subdued to what it works in, like the dyer’s hand”. Pixels are discrete – they’re rectangles – but they wear their approximateness openly; when we recognize them, we complain, and we are continually resampling them. <!-- A pixel has a scale. -->

To me, the vector view is more about databases and laws than about the world. It’s not the correcter sense of reality but only the convenienter one. Map data, a thing I delight in, is downstream of pixels and their peers. What we actually get from the world, not from clients’ datasets but from the big thing out there that we bodily and instrumentally sense, is samples. They are more like photos than like political maps. It does not disrespect vectors to say that creating them is interpretive work. But it does disrespect the world to think of it as only its maps. One of the great delights of photography is to see something in a picture you took that you did not intend.

## The conversation

For the past decade, you’ve been able to do numbers on geospatial LinkedIn by posting that satellite data itself is irrelevant to most customers. What users really want isn’t pixels, you can explain, but the actionable insights derived from those pixels.

This annoys me. It’s the [no take, only throw](https://cupcakelogic.tumblr.com/post/124392369931/she-is-still-learning) of data strategies: no problem, only solution. It is not, in fact, incredibly insightful to say “The client just wants a high-quality global forest map, not to get super granular about methodologies” because for example the client’s idea of what _forest_ is might not be one of the [many](https://efi.int/sites/default/files/files/publication-bank/2018/tr_88_annex1.pdf) standard definitions. Upsettingly to a certain kind of business mind, the questions we ask turn out to matter to the answers we get. With enough effort, we can partially encapsulate and abstract away the work of applying particular methods to particular data, but I regret to report that the process of understanding the world is stubbornly attached to the details of the world. Reality is very specific. Turning it into _actionable insights_ is not just translation; it’s interpretation.

This is where the idea of imagery as an economic commodity runs into trouble. A commodity is fungible. As a buyer of grade 1 red lentils or grade C10100 electronic copper, I expect the next ton I order to be substantially the same as the last one; if I learn it isn’t, I won’t buy it. As a buyer of satellite imagery, I expect the next image I order to be substantially different from the last one; if I learn it isn’t, I won’t buy it. Satellite imagery is more like news than it is like beans. It’s useful insofar as it carries the imprints of chunks of reality, and those don’t funge. As I once had the honor of hearing the semi-legendary imagery product expert Camilla Mahon explain to an industry exec, people care about what’s in the pictures.

I spent most of a decade on a team making and maintaining an imagery basemap. (This is why people occasionally ask me what such mosaics _really are_; in theory, I should know.) A basemap should be beautiful enough to be the foreground, but calm enough to be the background; self-consistent, but taking advantage of every useful data source; specific and recent, but also generalized and timeless. Ha! But there’s freedom wherever perfection is clearly unreachable. It becomes an engineering problem of balancing requirements. I had to learn to evaluate imagery in a way that mixed subjective esthetics with objective metrics. Satellite imagery got sharper during my time at that job, but its processing upstream of us seemed jammed at local maxima. Even the best of it had a slightly freezer-burned look that was easy to spot and hard to fix. It was the pansharpening. This was one of three or four problems that we couldn’t realistically correct as buyers and reprocessors of imagery. It chafed a little for a long time.

(I got that job mainly by developing an approach to pixel-sorting for removing clouds and seams from stacks of MODIS images. That was a way to make [cleaner low-resolution composites](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-04-03/a-satellite-map-capable-of-erasing-all-the-world-s-clouds). With Potato, I feel as if I’m back where I came in. Here I am again as an independent researcher with a strange opinion that we’re all doing niche aspects of image processing for remote sensing in a slightly wrong way. It’s my [two nickels](https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/dr-doofenshmirtz-if-i-had-a-nickel).)

When a friend asked about some artifacts in the Pléiades Neo sample images, in mid-2021, I rudely replied with an outline of everything I knew about pansharpening, and [posted it](https://gist.github.com/celoyd/5bb5417b24801e0446ad5977cc3581e4). It was mostly read by very polite friends, which is a tolerable fate. I hoped a few of its points might influence the field a bit, but if that happened, it hasn’t gotten back to me. To tinker with and care about a niche topic and read its preprints is to end up full of thorny opinions without an audience. This is such a pointless feeling, such a soapless bath of human nature, that it’s best to learn to see it as funny.

There’s an ancient myth about a developer who goes through a tech company’s interview process, gets hired onto a product team, fixes one particular bug, and quits before lunch on their first day. It was the only option after getting no response to a bug report they’d submitted as a user. That’s roughly my attitude with this project. If it all works, soon I’ll see more beautiful images of my homeworld when I use [OSM](https://www.openstreetmap.org/)’s traceable imagery layers, Apple Maps, Google Earth, and so on. If someone wants to hire me to implement it, good: this repo is after all only noncommercially licensed, and I enjoy and am fairly good at this kind of work. But the broader goal is that I can stop seeing these formalin-soaked–looking images everywhere. I think we are close to a little renaissance in this niche but nontrivial topic, and I am trying to do my part to bring it about.

## Clean and dirty windows

A drama critic might talk about alienation where a story asks for our conscious evaluation, and immersion where it feels like reality. In psychology, we can read about controlled processing of a new idea or object turning into automatic processing as someone learns to work with it and use it as a tool. The philosopher Alison Gopnik speaks of learning to explore (to figure out the rules) and to exploit (to apply the rules). Anthropology has a distinction between emic viewpoints, from within, versus etic viewpoints, from an outsider’s perspective.

Here let’s say that something is _opaque_ when seen unfamiliarly and from the outside, and _transparent_ when automatic and understood. In education and in everyday life it often helps to alternate between approaches. In the opaque phase, we revisit assumptions and examine our tools. In the transparent phase, we use the tools and live in the world with their help. Neither phase is more good or less necessary, and there is no permanent balance between them.

We should approach pansharpening as a more opaque concept, and aim to make pansharpened imagery more transparent. That is my prescription, and the thesis of this essay.

Most of what’s published about pansharpening as a task is too transparent. It assumes an understanding of the task and the goal: that it can be summed up as a neat little problem without much domain knowledge. But in fact there are many little details that require serious and situational thought that is not possible to simplify much without oversimplifying. All the little things turn out to matter. Data normalization matters. Color conversion matters. Band misalignment matters. Physical scale matters, and in a project about such things mattering, I haven’t been able to treat it properly. These are tough issues, and treating pansharpening as merely the fusion of mean(R, G, B) with R, G, and B is to solve a problem that no one really has. And to do that without adding any theoretical insight either is to do very little at all.

Most pansharpened imagery is too opaque. In part it must be the legacy of this kind of picture’s invention in surveillance and science. It was designed for people with special training in interpreting it, and only later adapted to serve everyday map-users. Imint analysts, hurricane meteorologists, and research ecologists were assumed to know exactly why vegetation looked red in false-color products and to understand the quirks of particular imaging systems in great depth. They were looking at Keyhole, GOES, and Landsat products as _visualizations of data_. Telling them they were looking at ordinary photos would be like telling pilots that they “drive planes” – it would insult their expertise. Satellite images were meant for their skills and therefore meant to be opaque: to be examined critically and with conscious awareness of the processes that made them. The things you saw in the pictures were designed to tell you about things on the ground more than to show things on the ground.

But that is not how most satellite imagery is used today. To produce imagery for an informed but non-specialist public according to the customs of image analysis experts is incorrect. First, it assumes knowledge that ordinary people don’t have. If you look at forums where people post interesting things they found on commercial imagery maps, you’ll see them continually bewildered by artifacts that are normal to anyone who’s had to look at [the diagram](https://duckduckgo.com/?t=ffab&q=remote+sensing+diagram&ia=images&iax=images) a hundred times. Showing them not-quite-true true color, or lousy pansharpening, or oversharp sampling, is likely to make them think the world actually looks like that.

Second, many of the conventions around imagery for experts are not in fact _good_, even for experts. Much of that special image interpretation knowledge is merely the communal memory of the limits of hardware from three generations ago, dressed up as beloved traditions. This blends with a gatekeep-y jealousy of what makes the community special: “Oh, vegetation being red is confusing to you? Not to me.” So experts will sometimes defend bad-looking images beyond any actually useful purpose.

English is transparent to me, but if I were taking a linguistics course, I would be taught to make it opaque. Education in any field often starts by problematizing or un–taking-for-granted. What _is_ a number, strictly speaking? How does sensory perception actually work? Where do karst landscapes, or ideas about childcare, or migration routes, come from? What do we assume by taking them as addressable categories? And in some sense the goal of education is to at least partially re-transparentize the concepts, so that the learner ends up with a concept of numbers, or the social construction of childcare, that they are able to inhabit _and_ to see.

Neither transparency nor opacity is better. Transparency is necessary to efficacy and opacity is necessary to understanding. When I look at pansharpening as a community of practice, I see too much assumption that we practitioners already understand it, and not enough work to make its results easy for the public to understand.

## Earth’s human shell

We are bubbles, Erasmus liked to say. The technical part of this project argues certain theses about pansharpening: that interpolating spectral power distributions is the right way to derive color, for example. In this more subjective corner, I make a more subjective claim: that pansharpening should make satellite images a bit more like ordinary photographs.

In my notebooks are sloppy tables, made while caramelizing onions and on BART, where I’ve tried to articulate something about kinds of images. Reading J.J. Gibson helped a little, and [Fleischmann and Arribas-Bel](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0198971524000760)’s aspatial/spatial imagery distinction was the closest I could find to a match for what I wanted to articulate. Samples of the division:

| Ordinary snapshots | Geospatial images |
| ------------------ | ----------------- |
| View from inside | View from outside |
| Bayer demosaicking or film development | Pansharpening |
| Camera metadata | Spacetime metadata |
| Arranged irregularly in spacetime | Regular to boundedly irregular in spacetime |
| Collected reactively, to record vision: prosthesis for memory, intended to have intrinsic value | Collected proactively, to extend vision: substitution for memory, intended to have instrumental value |
| Generally unknown POV that might be recovered from known points in the image | Continuous landscape and POV that can usually be co-determined |
| Uncalibrated R, G, B bands with unknown lighting | Calibrated multispectral bands lit by sunlight at a known angle through the atmosphere |
| Mostly 3D space with 2D influences (a bias to the horizontal); distance and subject orientation varies wildly – looking around near the bottom of the tidepool | Mostly 2D space with 3D influences (the wrinkles, folds, and foams of geology, ecology, and society); things are functionally in the geometric far field, therefore nearly orthographic and equidistant – looking down into the tidepool |
| Typically processed to approximate a sense of being embodied at the camera’s perspective, as a kind of window | Typically processed to be understood abstractly, as a kind of chart |
| Things meant to be seen: deliberate communication, even if indirectly | The back of the tapestry: environments and consequences |

I am trying, and failing so far, to learn to make sense to myself when I talk about how different kinds of images look different. I look at my feet and imagine bugs’ perspectives. This is why I seize on things like Zubin’s typology. Some of it’s about philosophical and technical distinctions that confuse me with their slippery nuance. But I have come to suspect that, alongside the subtle reasons, a serious problem is an aspect of media theory and optical physics understood by toddlers: that faraway things look small. And, relatedly, that we live sideways.

The daily environment, for most of us, is thoroughly designed for interpretation. We’re surrounded by intended meanings: signs, labels, buttons, lane markings, railings, photos, rumble strips, PA announcements, movies, knurls, notifications, maps, truncated-dome bump pads at crosswalks, graphic tees, apps, music, arrows, and especially words on screens and pages. There are even structures that try to get ideas across without permission, for example disinformation, the Gruen transfer, and advertising. All these symbols are spatially bound, and to evade them (when they are malign, or just for a break) we make spatial changes. We travel to another culture or to nature. We zoom in on something too small and unconsidered to be overloaded with external meaning. Or we zoom out. And this is one of the things about satellite imagery that makes it _like that_: it’s ad-free.

This cannot be completely true. Even in a narrow sense, there are stadia with logos on their roofs. (Architects sometimes call roofs _the fifth façade_.) In a middle sense, any fortress or mansion or skyscraper is a kind of self-advertisement. And in a very broad sense, anything made will reveal something about the intentions of its makers. But the human ideas embedded in the visible environment tend to wash out as it changes scale. As we zoom in or out on the world, we gain some critical distance; familiar thing-ness breaks, and we see opaque world-stuff of less obvious but more open possibilities.

It’s not just scale but angle too. Almost all human life happens in the atmosphere’s [surface layer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planetary_boundary_layer), its bottom 100 meters or so. A few people are in space, some are diving or flying, and some are underground or on the upper floors of skyscrapers, but almost all of us, almost all of the time, can visibly wave to someone on the planet’s surface if we’re near a window. Compared to the size of the planet, this human shell is barely there. It is proportionally thinner than the film of a flying soap bubble. Compared to the size of everyday experience – the hills in the distance, the walk to the store, and the bus to work – it’s still thin. We move and look side to side much more than up and down. We perceive a spatially 3D world, but at communal scales we’ve organized it primarily as a collection of ground-like surfaces. Mostly, human life happens near the ground and parallel to it.

Satellite images look down, and much has been made of the sense of dominion this allows, and fairly so. But down has other meanings too. In terms of how the built environment is organized, down is from the side. Almost all the world’s symbols and barriers face the horizon, to intersect our usual vision and motion. The view from above, then, is a cutaway without cutting. It doesn’t see inside buildings but it sees into things almost as hidden from a person on the sidewalk and much bigger: open-pit mines and feedlots, aggregate textures of neighborhoods, ancient ruins and paths, slow gradients in land use, the tracks of pipelines and highways, palace grounds, forests or their remains – things hard to see from close up in a human body. It’s like the converse of an MRI; it’s _so exterior_ that it gives outlines to things we cannot recognize while standing next to them.

## Images as dates

Before radiocarbon, archaeologists working on a historic site might be able to date layers by coins, by inscriptions, or by types of artifacts mentioned in old books. At a prehistoric site, though, it was almost definitional that there would be no absolute chronology. In a few lucky cases, there might be tree rings to match or annual sediment cycles to count. But usually, prehistory had to be seriated without dates. Pottery style A is found below pottery style B, and at a nearby site, pottery style C lies above B, and so, transitively, C is newer than A. This is a local, relative chronology.

Archaeologists tried to mosaic these local timelines into age-long continental histories. One of their main ideas was diffusionism, the principle that if two styles of material culture are similar, one presumably came from the other. Under the influence of colonial ideas of racial hierarchy, and without any regularizing force against calling random things similar, this kind of thinking got way out of control. It had a tone that we might retrospectively shorthand with a picture of a map covered by a web of red yarn. For example, there was a serious theory that Stonehenge was made under Mycenaean influence. Bronze age Greeks invented stone circles, the argument ran, so therefore if we find a stone circle in Wiltshire, we should assume it was at least indirectly one of theirs. And if the archaeologists of c. 1880–1960 Europe were so easily dismissive of the idea of independent creativity in prehistoric Europe, you can imagine the things they were saying about people on other continents.

Isotopic dating hit this field with such powerful consequences that they are called the radiocarbon revolutions, plural. Carbon dates placed Stonehenge’s construction at about 2500 BCE, and the first distinctively Mycenaean artifacts around 1750 BCE. Elsewhere, other such theories also disappeared like farts in a gale; New World artifacts presumed post-Columbian because of their sophistication were much older, Aboriginal Australians had been there several times longer than the textbooks had guessed, and so on. It was as if the fabric of prehistory were being uncrumpled, spread out, and its patterns made interpretable by the pins of reliable dates.

An archaeologist in 1965 might have worried that radiocarbon was going to turn the field into mere sample-collection: that the technology would shift archaeological work from inquiry to accounting. But it did not happen. With questions about _what happened when_ mostly settled by mailing a sample to a lab, more room opened to think about who, where, why, and how. In this new space grew new archaeologies. The New Archeology with caps was processual archeology, which attended to anthropological and ecological analyses, but there were many others: behavioral archeology personalizing things, cognitive archeology focusing on minds, and explicitly post-processual enterprises like the Tucson Garbage Project and Ian Hodder’s hermeneutic spiral at Çatalhöyük that questioned the epistemological bases of the discipline. Radiocarbon let archeology become more interesting.

As dating techniques got more precise, patterns and outliers appeared in their results, and their explanations were in astrophysics, ecology, and the Anthropocene itself. If you don’t understand the isotopic environment that your sample lived in, died in, and was preserved in, you can easily get results that look like time travel. And so a credible dating claim today is not a radiocarbon ratio alone; it’s also a site-specific story about how we should interpret it. There’s archeology in the chemistry. As the philosopher Alison Wylie writes in [_Radiocarbon dating in archeology: Triangulation and traceability_](https://philarchive.org/archive/WYLRDIv1):

> The upshot is that, to use radiocarbon data as the basis for an “absolute” chronology – a temporal framework that, in the ideal, extends to the whole of the global archaeological archive – it has been necessary to rely on a system of warrants that effectively add contextual data back in and are valuable precisely because they are local and limited in their mobility. This predicament of locality – that secure anchoring to the local is a
condition of mobility – is by no means unique to archeology.

By no means. So suppose that a satellite image is to geography what a carbon date is to archeology. It is mobile in the Latourian sense that Wylie uses: able to carry meaning among contexts and to be a member of an archive. In technical terms, every ARD bundle has much the same structure, and is valid input for much the same functions, no matter what part of the world it shows. But the value of this mobility depends on a spime- or provenance-like trace back to an origin. This is in the literal sense that it places things on a map, like a radiocarbon ratio places an organic object on a timeline. But it’s also in the sense that to understand what the ratio means, we have to know something about the organic object, and to understand the things in the image in detail, we have to know something about the place.

I take particular enjoyment in images of the landscapes of Madagascar. It will probably never be in my carbon budget to go there, and I will only ever have a sense of it through mobile representations of various kinds. When I notice vatolahy (stone monuments) by roads or on hills, sometimes the Malagasy archaeologist Ramilisonina comes to mind. An English collaborator of his, with whom he had done fieldwork on Malagasy megaliths in the ’90s, invited him to England to see Stonehenge. Ramilisonina saw it and said something like: “Oh, one of those.” He considered Stonehenge clearly a monument to the ancestors, part of a stone for the dead/wood for the living binary opposition that he knew from his own upbringing. This lent interpretation to a variety of theretofore poorly connected archeological finds in the area, like [Woodhenge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woodhenge). To read a landscape in this way was an extraordinary act of sensemaking. I have nothing to say about it as an archeological theory, being no archeologist, but it sticks with me as a human moment.

Satellite images sometimes seem to unnerve critically minded people because they look like big slabs of sterile, positive facts with no room for thinking. I hope that archeology’s experience with radiocarbon suggests another attitude. The images answer some questions about what is where, but they set up juicier ones about who, when, why, and how. Even the what must be revisited with fresh perspectives.


## The big things

Satellite imagery shares with many other complex things that its strengths and weaknesses are mostly the same qualities. Because it’s good at showing the works of the powerful and the effects of disasters, it can train you into a cynical way of looking at the world: an attitude that believes itself realistic, but can only see wealth and suffering. If you walked around wearing cursed goggles that only let you see things that are outdoors and larger than a few meters, you would have a very strange sense of the world. It would be the mansions, parking lots, and observatories with none of the lives inside them. Taken with more thought and care, in chosen contexts, these images are things that civil society needs. “Civil society” is stilted. I mean things that _we_, you and I, need or will need.

For several years, two of my side responsibilities at my job were helping source imagery for disaster response and contributing stories about imagery to the company Instagram. They made an odd pair of tasks. I saw and heard some gnarly stuff while adjacent to disaster response; I wasn’t even _there_, but [some](https://web.archive.org/web/20201001065633/https://blog.maxar.com/leading-the-industry/2013/typhoonhaiyan) of those images and stories have a way of sticking with you. I have a few reminiscences I’d be happy not to share. But I also saw surpassingly beautiful things. Ten years later I still tear up a bit when I revisit [the photos of the Kathmandu Living Labs people](https://www.wired.com/2015/05/nepal-earthquake-aid/) around their table, at their laptops, tired, on their phones, heroes.

I had a lot of fun making marketing material, but I kept stumbling over the problem that clear and interesting changes to Earth’s surface tend to show the worst day of someone’s life. You will get a lot of clicks on a post showing the giant flames of a wildfire, but it may end up in the scroll of someone in an evacuation center down the road from that fire, whose neighbors are not answering their phones, above a “Wow, Earth science is actually very exciting! Subscribe for more interesting content and a 5% discount!”–style caption. Local and mobile.

I live by the Hayward Fault. People I care about are distributed along other faults, in forests due to burn, on floodplains, where heat waves visit, around active volcanoes, and where typhoons and hurricanes land. Many or all of us will one day need bottled water, or crowbars, or smokejumpers. For each of us in our turns, I hope that our dispatchers are as competent and strong-hearted as the young people of Kathmandu Living Labs, and that they have clear and recent images as primary references. I have my reservations about ways of making the world legible to distant power. I have also seen that many things in the world turn out to work well for horizontal, distributed care at scale (in [Deb Chachra’s sense](https://comment.org/care-at-scale/)) if we actually use them that way.

Potato is trained entirely on imagery from the Maxar Open Data Program, which is licensed CC BY-NC in order to be useful for disaster response. Beyond complying with its license terms, I have tried to use the data in general alignment with that intent. One reason for Potato’s small size is to encourage further work toward pansharpeners that are useful in the time- and resource-constrained environments of disasters. If anything demonstrated here helps move the Pareto front of usefulness v. turnaround time for satellite imagery, I will be very glad. There should be reliable, detail-resolving pansharpeners everywhere they are useful.

And so satellite imagery’s instrumental uses are very important to me. But I also take it as an end in itself. In part I guess I mean an elevated and numinous joy, a mind- and heart-expanding perception of uncountable life and horizonless complexity that visibly surrounds us. That’s the kind of thing that’s important to feel but rarely interesting to hear about from someone else. But even apart from it, or different yet not exactly delineated from it, there is a simple lazy joy – an aimless, snacky, unvirtuous, entertained joy. It’s the Saturday morning with a coffee Landsat session and the Sunday evening with a beer Google Earth session, not in service of anything, just looking at pictures of places the way people watch TV or eat pistachios on the hill in the park.

Ordinary enjoyment is one of the main things that keeps me coming back to this project and others like it. When I see processing shortcomings, I want to fix them not only out of professional commitment or to alleviate human suffering or whatever, but in a purely selfish way, so I can pan around Alaskan wetlands without thinking “The chlorophyll in the sedges is leading to weird gradients. This is why you have to account for the IR bias of the pan band.” – I just want to see the marshes and eat my pistachios.

Snapshots again. Some virtues of snapshots can only belong to them. Because snapshots as a practice have been so widely and lovingly cultivated by a century of free experimentation and design iteration, they are palpably the best kind of image in certain ways. I want their immediacy. I want their way of leaping toward the curious eye, ready to be caught. They should inform and inspire pansharpening. It’s not quite that I want to steer satellite images toward phonecam or 35mm or DSLR photos. It’s more that I want to push pansharpening in parallel, in some dimensions, toward broadly similar goals of clarity. Snapshots’ virtues make for more casually pleasant images, but (carefully balanced against other virtues) also for more technically useful, interpretable images. That is the point of Potato.

Any way of making images will leave traces of its methods. I take this from the philosophers, but also from engineering principles. An image with no visible noise or errors – no Airy disks, no shot noise – is an undersampled image. The slight demosaicking artifacts (and soft corners, camera shake, and imperfect focus) in well-processed snapshots are not intrusions on the images, only on the illusion of the images as apodictic, open portals onto reality. A film photo is allowed grain if you look closely and an audio recording is allowed a bit of hiss if you turn it all the way up. We can clean out many artifacts but eventually scrubbing becomes scraping, and we have to let the remaining ones belong. When we make pansharpened images, then, we should be trying to make well-pansharpened images, not images that pretend not to have been pansharpened.

Earth is beautiful beyond beauty and should be shown that way as we are able. To try to _make_ images of Earth beautiful the way a real estate agent touches up photographs of a McMansion would not work. We have to be moving toward some kind of transparency while accepting we will never arrive at it. Earth’s surface is overwhelmingly wholesome and yet it is also, in some places, in certain ways, immiserated or worrying. Like anything else that is, in a broad sense, alive, it resists being summarized or translated. It’s not a mere message. The notes on Zubin’s talk say _there is no perspective_.
